Mundaka Upanishad
Translator: Max Muller
Source: Sacred Books of the East (SBE15)

1. BRAHMA was the first of the Devas, the maker of the universe, the preserver of the world. He told the knowledge of Brahman, the foundation of all knowledge, to his eldest son Atharva 1 .
2. Whatever Brahmâ told Atharvan, that knowledge of Brahman Atharvan formerly told to Aṅgir; he told it to Satyavâha Bhâradvâ g a, and Bhâradvâ g a told it in succession to Aṅgiras.
3. S aunaka, the great householder, approached Aṅgiras respectfully and asked: 'Sir, what is that through which, if it is known, everything else becomes known?'
4. He said to him: 'Two kinds of knowledge must be known, this is what all who know Brahman tell us, the higher and the lower knowledge.'
5. 9 The lower knowledge is the Ri g-veda, Ya g ur-veda, Sâma-veda, Atharva-veda, S ikshâ (phonetics), Kalpa (ceremonial), Vyâkara n a (grammar), Nirukta (etymology), Kh andas (metre), G yotisha (astronomy) 2 ; but the higher knowledge is that by which the Indestructible (Brahman) is apprehended.'
6. 'That which cannot be seen, nor seized, which has no family and no caste 1 , no eyes nor ears, no hands nor feet, the eternal, the omnipresent (all-pervading), infinitesimal, that which is imperishable, that it is which the wise regard as the source of all beings.'
7. 'As the spider sends forth and draws in its thread, as plants grow on the earth, as from every man hairs spring forth on the head and the body, thus does everything arise here from the Indestructible.'
8. 'The Brahman swells by means of brooding (penance) 2 ; hence is produced matter (food); from matter breath 3 , mind, the true 4 , the worlds (seven), and from the works (performed by men in the worlds), the immortal (the eternal effects, rewards, and punishments of works).'
9. 'From him who perceives all and who knows all, whose brooding (penance) consists of knowledge, from him (the highest Brahman) is born that Brahman 1 , name, form 2 , and matter (food).'
10. Considering sacrifice and good works as the best, these fools know no higher good, and having enjoyed (their reward) on the height of heaven, gained by good works, they enter again this world or a lower one.
11. But those 2 who practise penance and faith in the forest, tranquil, wise, and living on alms, depart free from passion through the sun to where that immortal Person dwells whose nature is imperishable 3 .
12. Let a Brâhma n a, after he has examined all these worlds which are gained by works, acquire freedom from all desires. Nothing that is eternal (not made) can be gained by what is not eternal (made). Let him, in order to understand this, take fuel in his hand and approach a Guru who is learned and dwells entirely in Brahman.
13. To that pupil who has approached him respectfully, whose thoughts are not troubled by any desires, and who has obtained perfect peace, the wise teacher truly told that knowledge of Brahman through which he knows the eternal and true Person.
